-> Introduction


A Graph is a non-linear data structure consisting of vertices and edges.
The vertices are sometimes also referred to as nodes and the edges are lines or arcs that connect any two nodes in the graph.
More formally a Graph is composed of a set of vertices( V ) and a set of edges( E ). The graph is denoted by G(V, E).

Graph data structures are a powerful tool for representing and analyzing complex relationships between objects or entities.
They are particularly useful in fields such as social network analysis, recommendation systems, and computer networks



-> Some Terminologies


1. Nodes/Vertices 
Vertices are the fundamental units of the graph. Every node/vertex can be labeled or unlabelled.

2. Edges
Edges are drawn or used to connect two nodes of the graph. It can be ordered pair of nodes in a directed graph.
Edges can connect any two nodes in any possible way. Sometimes, edges are also known as arcs. Every edge can be labelled/unlabelled.

3. Weight
A weight can be assigned to an edge, representing the cost or distance between two vertices. 
A weighted graph is a graph where the edges have weights.

4. Degree
The degree of a vertex is the number of edges that connect to it.
In a directed graph, the in-degree of a vertex is the number of edges that point to it, and the out-degree is the number of edges that start from it.

5. Path
A path is a sequence of vertices that are connected by edges. A simple path does not contain any repeated vertices or edges.

6. Cycle
A cycle is a path that starts and ends at the same vertex. A simple cycle does not contain any repeated vertices or edges.


-> Types Of Graphs :


1. Null Graph
A graph is known as a null graph if there are no edges in the graph.

2. Trivial Graph
Graph having only a single vertex, it is also the smallest graph possible.

3. Undirected Graph
A graph in which edges do not have any direction. That is the nodes are unordered pairs in the definition of every edge. 

4. Directed Graph
A graph in which edges have direction. That is the nodes are ordered pairs in the definition of every edge.

5. Connected Graph
The graph in which from one node we can visit any other node in the graph is known as a connected graph. 

Connected Component: It is a subgraph in which each pair of nodes is connected with each other via a path.

6. Disconnected Graph
The graph in which at least one node is not reachable from a node is known as a disconnected graph.

7. Regular Graph
The graph in which the degree of every vertex is equal to K is called K regular graph.

8. Complete Graph
The graph in which from each node there is an edge to each other node.

9. Cycle Graph
The graph in which the graph is a cycle in itself, the degree of each vertex is 2. 

10. Cyclic Graph
A graph containing at least one cycle is known as a Cyclic graph.

11. Directed Acyclic Graph
A Directed Graph that does not contain any cycle. 

12. Bipartite Graph
A graph in which vertex can be divided into two sets such that vertex in each set does not contain any edge between them.

13. Weighted Graph
A graph in which the edges are already specified with suitable weight is known as a weighted graph. 
Weighted graphs can be further classified as directed weighted graphs and undirected weighted graphs.

14. Sparse Graphs 
A graph with relatively few edges compared to the number of vertices.

15. Dense Graphs 
A graph with many edges compared to the number of vertices.

16. Tree
A connected graph with no cycles

17. Simple Graphs
A simple graph is a graph that does not contain more than one edge between the pair of vertices

18. Multi Graphs
Any graph which contains some parallel edges but doesn’t contain any self-loop is called a multigraph. For example a Road Map. 

Parallel Edges: If two vertices are connected with more than one edge then such edges are called parallel edges that are many routes but one destination.
Loop: An edge of a graph that starts from a vertex and ends at the same vertex is called a loop or a self-loop.

19. Planar Graphs
A graph is said to be planar if it can be drawn on a plane without any edges crossing each other.



-> For a undirected graph, total degree of a graph is twice the number of edges